Hello, my beautiful
co-creators.
Lilou, for Gaiam TV.
Today I'm in Orlando, Florida
with Michael Cooley, hello.
Hello, Lilou.
How are you doing?
I'm doing well, thank you.
It's beautiful out here.
Yes, definitely not
as cold as in Europe.
I had to come back to
the US a little bit.
Or as cold as in New
England, where I'm from.
It's really, really
cold up there, too.
So this is great-- great
place to get together.
Yes, and a great story.
You're going to be so
inspired by this story.
Tell us about your
background, because I
know you're an entrepreneur.
You're a CEO now and an author.
But this was definitely not
the case years and years ago,
when you went through
your rock bottom, which
is also the title of your book.
Tell us what you went through
so that we can understand.
And then we'll go into--
for everybody watching,
this is really about going
and reaching your dreams,
whatever your background.
you're definitely
the man that says
it's possible to live
those and to live
a successful, happy life.
Well, thank you.
Thank you for saying that.
And I so believe it myself.
The story of "Rock Bottom"
is the story of my background
as is child raised
between a broken home
with a mother who
was an alcoholic,
a father who was a
hard-working blue collar
worker, who remarried.
But he married into a family
where my stepmother, who
had two children of our own that
were older-- we quickly learned
going into that family
what child abuse was
from mental, physical, sexual,
emotional abuse that went on
in that family with my
little brother and me
for over a decade,
to my mother's home
up in Saint Louis,
where we moved
from apartment to apartment
to apartment, kicked out.
She was an alcoholic.
We had nine different
step fathers growing up.
There was abuse there.
So we went from one
abusive home to another,
never went to the
same elementary school
twice in a row in a year, and
sometimes went to and three
different elementary schools.
So we were traveling all
over, going through this abuse
until I reached the point at
15 where I left home for good.
I went out on the road.
I hitchhiked all over.
I lived on the streets.
I ended up in St. Louis sleeping
in alleyways and rooftops
and any shanty I could
find, beg, borrowing,
and stealing for money.
Ended up finding a new family.
That family turned out
to be a street gang.
We ended up running the street.
It was a lot of kids that
were lost, like I was,
going to abusive situations
with their families.
In the end, we were a group of
kids that were filled with rage
and anger, and we
were out hurting
people and doing bad things
and getting in trouble.
It landed me in lockup
and incarceration.
Then eventually--
I'm now my 20s--
Not now, but you were then.
No, now, as the
story goes, right?
Even though I may look 20--no.
Definitely not 20-- but in my
20 I was hitting rock bottom,
living out of a broken down car,
getting cleaned up in a rest
stop, traveling aimlessly
with nowhere to go,
trying to get gas
money, in lockup again.
And I actually hit
rock bottom, and that
was the end of the road for me.
And if I was going to
stay on this path I was
going to stay on, I was going
to end up dead, in prison,
or insane.
So I took a road that I'd
never been down before.
I took a job in a mail
room at minimum wage.
I met some incredible people
who helped me along the way, who
inspired me, who
helped me learn,
help me to get an education,
helped me to get a good job.
And they taught me
how to be human again.
Because you felt
like an animal before.
I did.
I felt like an animal
that was caged.
And what happens
when an animal who
is caged, who was
constantly beaten, as I felt
happened as I was
a kid and teenager?
They do one of two things.
Either they curl up and die, or
they lash out in rage as soon
as they have the chance.
Well, I did the latter.
I lashed out in rage,
ran the streets,
and it was a crazy time.
And I was destined
to die, but I chose
this path that I'd
never been down
before, where I knew no one.
Before I chose this path, nobody
wanted anything to do with me.
I was that animal.
I was dangerous.
People were afraid of me.
And when I took that path
that I took down that road
and I met the people that I met,
I joined the company I joined.
I then developed out
to be human again,
learned how to be
socially aware,
and actually learned
how to communicate.
Some people say I still
can't communicate,
but I talk better than used
to, let me tell you that.
And so I went down this road.
I developed my career.
I went from the mail
room at minimum wage
to senior vice president of
operations for a $40 million
consulting firm.
I went on there
to senior director
of administration
for a $70 million
health care records company.
And then from there I was
recruited out of Dallas
up to New England, where
for the last six years
have been the CEO of a national
records management company.
And so I have a great family.
I have a great wife and kids.
I have a great company
I work for, great people
that I'm surrounded by.
All of that said, I just
shouldn't be this lucky.
So after going
through everything
I went through, having
everything I have
today, I look in the mirror.
I think about it.
I say, you know,
this story needs
to be an example for others.
So maybe I can use my past to
help others with their future.
I know you speak in
companies and in prisons
also in home shelters
and everywhere,
and your true heart desire
is to inspire people.
Here, I feel for people
looking for their purpose
or something, or at
least a meaning in life,
because, I guess, did
you have a meaning?
I mean, you were just
surviving at that time, right?
That's all it
was, was a survival
instinct, just to survive.
But the whole-- so you'd think
that the end of the story,
the end of "Rock Bottom"
from the streets to success
could be I went
from the streets,
and now I have what
many deem to be success.
You head up a company.
You've got a great family.
You've got the house.
You've got the car.
You've got the
community involvement.
You've got all that.
But at the end of the
day, my real success
comes from what I'm able to do
today, which is to your comment
I speak to groups.
I speak to people.
And what I try to do is try
to use my story to maybe help
not only those who are trying
to come from rock bottom,
but those who already have
success, they have all of that.
But they still have a
real purpose in life.
It's all about making money,
the bottom line, what trip we're
going on, how big our house is.
And what I've learned that
it's much more than that.
To me, when I look at my kids,
and I try to develop character
in them, and I have them come
with me when I'm speaking
at homeless shelters or
prisons and how can we
help as a society to
inspire people to,
no matter what their
circumstances are,
to change it and be more
than they ever thought
could happen based on
how they were raised.
I was the kid that was told
that you'll never be anything,
I wish you were never
born, I wish you were dead,
I want you out, and not just by
parents, but by other people,
by stepfamily.
They just didn't want
anything to do with me.
We were the kids that never
should have been born.
But yet today we are
able to give back.
My little brother who went
through the same situation
as I have, he has three
successful car dealerships
in St. Louis, and he
has incredible family,
and his children
are doing very well.
Collectively, we are
hopefully examples of people;
no matter how low
your rock bottom is,
you can be anything
you want to be.
But once you get
there, once you get
to becoming human again, what
are you going to do with that?
But I guess not everybody
went through such
a huge rock bottom,
but we maybe went
through different versions of
that and different messages
that we received growing up.
And sometimes when we don't hit
that rock bottom, where we're
in a situation where we can
be very a sad or even angry
or don't know how to get
out of the situation,
what is your
recommendation to step out
and to live kind of
like you're lucky now.
You live it, and
your brother, too.
Is that something
that was on your past?
Was that really a commitment
of yours at some point?
Well, you know, I believe in
fate, and there's a lot of fate
involved with my life and
what's happened in that regard.
However, from a
purpose standpoint,
I had to learn how to do
everything again, including
just being out here
in front of people,
to be speaking in
front of people.
I mean, I was the guy that
if we had a big meeting,
would hide behind a
curtain because he didn't
want to be called on
or noticed because
of my incredible insecurity.
But now today I'm speaking
to thousands of people,
and they can't
get me to shut up.
But it's more then just being
out there speaking to people,
telling the story
of "Rock Bottom."
It's more about how
you can connect the two
haves with the have nots and
how you can make a difference
on a larger more global scale.
For example, I'll be speaking
in a homeless shelter at night.
And the next day
as a CEO, I might
be signing a six-figure
contract with a workers agency
to use their employees.
Well, you know,
they know my story.
I match the agency with
the homeless shelter,
and they're suddenly
putting people to work.
That, to me, is making a
difference and using a purpose,
and that's what I
deem to be success.
Or somebody that'll
hear my story
and travel on
three or four buses
to see me because they want
their three-year-old to have
a positive role
model in their like
because they've dealt with
so much abuse and issues
from a male.
And so all of that
said, that is the kind
of stories, the kind of
inspiration I hope to provide.
That's why I told
"Rock Bottom" because I
hope it's used to help
others with their future.
And that's what I'm
trying to do as a goal,
as a business leader as
well as personal leader.
So for you it' really serving,
being there of service,
giving of your time, giving
back to the community.
For you, this is really a
big part of success, what
would you see success as now.
It is, and so stop me
if you've heard this,
but you have the people
that will tell you
that the only time anybody
wants anything to do with me
or comes around and
sees me is if they
want me to drive them somewhere,
or they want me to pay.
They only when me to go out
with them because I'm buying.
That everybody's
always using me.
My kids are using me.
My parents are using me.
Everybody's using me.
Well, to that end, to this
day, I tell everybody I talk
to that I want you to use me.
How can you use
me to help others?
And how can you use this story?
And that is my passion is to
see what happens to people when
college kids and speak
at the university
are getting ready to
start their whole career
and their whole
life, and they're
trying to decide what they're
going to do with their future,
and they hear a story like
this, whatever they're doing
in their future, they
can tie the inspiration
that they can become to
help others along the way.
And that's the kind of
stuff that's really truly
moving to me and gives
me great gratitude,
gives me great appreciation
for what I've gone through.
So that's what you
recommend to kids,
let's say, to kids
coming out of school?
What would you tell them?
Do really just serve
unconditionally and let
life bring you, or also,
are you into planning,
or what is your recommendation
to them for their future,
and which we can all apply
anywhere we're at in our Life
Absolutely, and actually, it's
going to be each person's going
to develop their own path.
But the two things you
said were critical.
One is everything is
done with a purpose.
There's a plan.
I'm a very detailed planner
from the moment I get up,
to the end the day.
And so there's
planning about it,
but there's also the opportunity
of unconditional assistance
whenever it's needed.
So you might have a plan
throughout your day,
and then you'll get a call
that somebody needs some help,
and you need to stop what you're
doing because that person,
you might be the helping
hand that changes
their life in that regard.
And so now that I do this
speaking, I get a lot of those
calls from somebody with a
challenge with their daughter
or their son, or somebody
incarcerated will write me
from prison with
their challenges,
and if I can help somebody who
will be getting out of prison
and be in a halfway house.
A business leader who has
everything in the world, that
running a large
company, but they're
challenged with their
daughter, what can
I do to give back
in that regard?
And they want to know
how they can help.
To the Catholic
Diocese or a church
that may contact you to say,
how can we reach these teens?
Those are the things
that I look for.
So you have your plan, and you
look for these fateful things
that come your way,
and you say that you're
just called to go do something
unconditionally in that regard.
So yeah, I agree that you
have to be prepared for that.
You have to be prepared for
the life you want to live.
If it's in college,
getting an education,
building your future,
getting a good job.
Yeah, that may be
your plan to do
that, but never
forget the that's just
a means to get you through.
But life is a
long, long journey,
so you're going to find a point
where you're going to need
a purpose, and it goes way
beyond how big your house
is, how much money you have.
It goes beyond.
You have to do something for
your soul and for hopefully
to help the souls of others,
and that's what I hope to leave,
when I leave as a legacy.
I hope my kids carry it on
[INAUDIBLE] to helping others.
And that's a lot to say
for somebody who was angry
at the world and felt
wronged by the world,
and felt abused to say--
Not worthy,
--and not worthy at
all, and felt like he
didn't deserve to be alive.
And then now today I'm
saying, I'm not doing enough.
I've got to do more.
I've got to get out there.
I've got to get more
in front of people.
And so what I tried to do was
stories like this was speaking
my story to get an audience to
say, maybe of the 200 people
you speak to, maybe a
couple of them are moved,
and they go out and
change the world.
And the incredible people I've
met along the way, that's kind
of been their purpose as well.
And it's just been really
moving for me and inspirational,
and it kind of drives me
in who I am today, I think.
And in those hard
moments, I guess,
you still have them, moments,
what do you go back to?
And I do drawback, but
here's the main point.
[INAUDIBLE] I can help out in
this way-- basketball game,
and your daughter's
cheerleading,
and you have to
divide and conquer.
But my most hectic day
today, or my worst day today,
is better than my
best day 25 years ago.
And so believe me, I
like those challenges.
But you do have to manage
and plan it and decide
you can only deliver so much.
Do you live a life of--
and please come back here.
Is it about being 100%
responsible in our lives
for what happens?
How do you see that?
Yeah, and that is the truth.
I mean, you have
to make that choice
in your life to be responsible
and take responsibility for it.
And the blame game is only
going to get your so far.
And at the end, it's
still going to come
back to what you can do.
Again, when you want
to know how that works,
have a day when nobody's
there, and you have
nobody there to assist you.
And you have to make
those decisions.
That's the kind of choices
you should make about life.
And whether it's your boss
breathing down your neck,
whether it's your [INAUDIBLE]
want you to do something,
you have so many things
going on, at the end the day,
you're going to have
to take responsibility
for those choices that you make.
You may not control how
people respond to you,
but you have to
be able to control
how you respond to people
in challenges and so on.
So that's what you can control.
So at the end the day, it
is only up to you, isn't it?
It is not to somebody else.
At least, that's the way
I choose to feel about it.
And when you have
kids that have-- it's
a problem in the US--
that have problems
with drugs or even
alcohol at a young age,
what's your advice on that?
Like kids that refuse
authority, that
want to just really the
break the whole-- no family,
I mean, for whatever
reason the parents
are in this situation of having
kids with an addiction problem,
what do you say?
Right, and again,
you're exactly right.
When it has to do
with drugs, it's
the worst case
scenario for a parent.
[INAUDIBLE] that just because
they went through abuse,
that was an excuse
for me to do drugs.
Again, that was not.
And a lot of kids out
there experiment who
have great parents, and they're
doing the best they can,
and then they get
hit with something
devastating like that.
They don't know how
to respond, especially
those who've never
done drugs themselves,
and their children are doing it.
It is a scary, scary
thing that you would find
yourself laying awake at night.
And this is what I hear from
the people that I'm speaking to.
And I'm trying to
help where I can,
using my background experience.
But I think the key
is from day one,
you have to be involved
with your kids' lives--
from day one.
And you have to
be a partnership.
If you're a single parent,
it is challenging enough,
but if you're a
husband and wife,
you have to be in
connection, and you
have to be a part
of your kid's life,
and you have to
divide and conquer.
Like we have two kids, and
the thing I say right now
is at least it's two
against two, right?
But when you have parents
that are on their own,
they have to stay involved
in their kid's life,
and they have to stay
involved throughout,
and they have to ask questions.
They have to be involved.
They can't be their best friend.
They've got to be
parents from the end
because those kids need them
to guide them through that part
of their life.
But let's say you find out that
your kid is in that situation,
and one of them is having a big
drug issue, how would you react
or how would you take
it from that point?
It starts there.
It starts with when
you discover that
and when you find
that out, and then
the talking that goes on behind
it, sitting down with them,
talking with them about it.
The thing in my case
is I'm going to be
able to relate to experience.
[INAUDIBLE] that you
don't know what it's like
because you've never done
that particular drug.
Well, I can almost guarantee
you in any case I have done
that particular drug, and
I know what it does to you,
and how the euphoria
starts in the beginning.
But I also know how it ends up.
[INAUDIBLE] and able to be
able to describe those stories
to them and tell them
those stories to them,
frankly, sometimes scares
the hell out of those kids
that haven't seen that yet.
And sometimes that shocks
it out of their system.
And not only do they
stopped doing that,
they actually start becoming
an advocate for changing that.
Also, trying to surround them
with other kids that also know
what drugs are
going to do to you
and don't want any part of
it, and they'll help them
through that, versus
surrounding yourself with people
that they think they
have all the answers.
And these kids are
doing the drugs
and trying to suck them in.
It just goes back to being
involved with your kids' lives.
So the environment
is super important?
It really is.
Keeping your kids involved
in stuff other than just
hanging out, from athletics.
I have a program in my house
called the AAA program.
And the rewards that go
along with that program
include achieving your
success in academics,
in athletics, and in the arts.
So whatever that
is, so, for example,
my son's grades are in receiving
A's in those areas, right?
So that's the AAA program.
There's rewards and are tied to
what you do in grades-- making
the honor role and what
that achieves-- what you do
in athletics, as far as
how hard you practice
and playing on the teams and
being involved with that,
to the arts, whether it
be computer graphics,
whether it be drawing, whether
it be painting. [INAUDIBLE]
around the art
side and the grades
and the achievements
you have in there.
And so that gives them a
purpose, a plan, a goal in that
regard.
And that's how we
as a family reward,
so they'll be
thinking about that
and the ramifications
of if they're
not successful in that
area how we do that.
And that's a long
way from where I
came from, where I
dropped out of school
and had no interest at school.
I mean, if a teacher
yelled at me,
I'd just leave the
classroom and not come back.
Education wasn't important.
I didn't realize till later in
life when I went back to school
and went back and got my degree
how hungry I was to learn
and how much more I
could do with knowledge.
So you're successful,
financially wise,
but this is more than that.
You decided to bring
out this book out
and to speak about your story
and speak to everybody really,
even the people that knew
you not from that background,
because it's only later,
from my understanding,
that you decided to open up.
Is that essential, do you
feel, to open up to be true,
to be ourselves, and
to fully come out,
whatever the coming out is?
Well, it truly is freeing
when I told the story
and when I came out about it.
And one of the first
things I had to do
was go back with the people
who didn't know my past,
from the owner of the company to
family and friends and members
about.
Like I told him
about it, and I've
got to tell you,
[INAUDIBLE] the commitment
I had to make when I
came out with the book
was I wasn't going to judge
whatever the reaction was.
And I've got reactions
that run the gambit.
But most and overall I got
reactions of people who truly
cared, who truly embraced it.
And when I speak,
a lot of people
ask if I've gone through
therapy or if I'm
in therapy related to it.
And I tell them that this
is my therapy right here.
Being in front of them and
seeing what it does to them
and seeing what's happened
to them, it drives me.
It helps me.
It helps me learn.
And it helps me be
a better person,
and that's what
I'm trying to do.
So they are my therapy
when I do that.
And I'm sure I need a lot of
different kinds of therapies,
but that's just one
way I feed that.
This is beautiful
because a lot of people
are going after the next book,
the next video, the next thing.
But you're really living on
the field, not in the stands.
Yeah, true, and again the
goal, as you mentioned,
it's not financial.
I have everything I could
ever want in that regard.
It is the fact that I
have to get this story out
because I feel that
it can help somebody.
And again, for selfish
reasons, it feeds my own soul.
It feeds my own purpose.
But at the end of the day, I
hope it also helps other people
and feeds their soul and their
purpose, and they have a plan.
If we can summarize everything
that we said or some things
that are important to mention
or at the core of your message,
what would that be?
Well I think one
of the things that's
key to do what I mentioned is
the fact that "Rock Bottom" is
about refusing to fail, about no
matter what your circumstances
are, there are examples
out there, way beyond me,
of people who have taken
their worst circumstances
and turned it into extreme
success and a purpose
to help others.
And so I think mine is just
but one story to do that.
The other story I'll say is
"Rock Bottom" is also not
the story about what you
have, what you were given,
what was afforded to you, what
the government's given you,
what your family's given
you to get you started.
It's about the choice that
you make to make a difference.
And like I said, I don't
care what the job is
and what level the job is.
My goal is that every
job that I've ever had,
I try to take it
to that next level.
And then you never know where
it'll take you ultimately.
And so I think that's key, and
I think another key is who you
surround yourself with,
the kind of people
you surround yourself with.
And we talk to our kids
about it all the time.
Don't be hanging
out with that kid.
They're bad news.
They're not good news.
But as adults,
too, are you going
to have people that are
constantly negative to you
on the job?
Are you going to have
people that are constantly
[INAUDIBLE] how you should
live and what you should be
and that idea will never work?
Are you going to have people
that are feeding your soul
and telling you, you can
be anything you want to be?
And that's what
"Rock Bottom" says.
You can be anything
that you want to be,
no matter where you come from.
Awesome, Michael, this was
really good. [INAUDIBLE]
Florida, and I know
you're flying back home.
I am, yes, and I can't wait.
My son broke his ankle playing
basketball while I was away,
and so I've got to
get back to him,
see what's going on there
because he's going to be pretty
down about being off
the basketball team
while he's hurt, so looking
forward to getting back tonight
and seeing the kids,
and I really, really
appreciate you taking
time to come out here
and coming together like this.
You're welcome.
Thank you.
Thank you, my beautiful
co-creators out there,
much, much love.
I hope you've enjoyed this
video, and we're here.
We're here to send more
inspiration and love
and happiness around the globe.
Thank you.
-Thank you so much.
Bye.